Quality control and manual segmentation episode (#43)
HealthBioscienceIDEAS/microscopy-novice: episodes/quality-control-and-manual-segmentation.md

with being able to see the locations or sizes of all nuclei.

Next, it's good practice to check the image histogram, as we covered in the 
[choosing acquisition settings episode
](choosing-acquisition-settings.md#initial-quality-control). We'll do this in 
the exercise below:

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge 

## Histogram quality control

Plot the image histogram with `napari matplotlib`:

- Do you see any issues with the histogram?

If you need a refresher on how to use `napari matplotlib`, check out the 
[image display episode](image-display.md#napari-plugins).

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution 

### Solution

In the top menu bar of Napari select:  
`Plugins > napari Matplotlib > Histogram`

Make sure you have the 'nuclei' layer selected in the layer list (should be 
highlighted in blue).

![](fig/nuclei-histogram.png){alt="A histogram of the 29th z slice of Napari's 
cell sample image"}

Note that as this image is 3D `napari matplotlib` only shows the histogram of 
the current z slice (in this case z=29 as shown at the top of the histogram). 
Moving the slider at the bottom of the viewer, will update the histogram to show 
different slices.

> If we look at the brightest part of the image, near z=29, we can see that there 

Reviewer: What do the white vertical lines on the histograms mean? If they are max and minimum values why is the minimum not zero? Or was this all covered in another episode.

Author: I'll clarify this in the text. The white lines show the current contrast limits, which by default aren't set to the full range from min to max. It's a known issue that is in the process of being fixed on Napari - https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/6534#issuecomment-1853644167

Reviewer: I think the added text makes this clear now.

Reviewer 2: Agree!

are pixel values over much of the possible range. This being said, it is a bit 
underexposed as pixel values are clustered at the left hand side, with few 

> values to the right. In an ideal world the image could have been acquired with a 

Author: Thanks @davecash75 - I've removed the section about the image being underexposed. I've also made it clearer in the text - adding a section that checks the data type explicitly and demonstrates zooming into the top end of the histogram.

longer exposure time / higher laser power etc to collect more light. This slight 
underexposure isn't a big issue here though, as we can still clearly separate 
the nuclei from the background which is our main aim.

Most importantly, we see no evidence for 'clipping', which means we are avoiding 
any irretrievable loss of information this would cause. Recall that clipping 
occurs when pixels are recording light above the maximum limit for the image. 
Therefore, many values are 'clipped' to the maximum value resulting in 
information loss.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## What is segmentation?

In order to count the number of cells, we must 'segment' the nuclei in this 

> image. Segmentation is the process of figuring out what each pixel in an image 

Reviewer: A more technical description ...
```suggestion
image. Segmentation is the process of labelling each pixel in an image."
```
Not sure which is better.

represents e.g. is that pixel part of a nucleus or not? Segmentation comes in 
two main types - 'semantic segmentation' and 'instance segmentation'. 

Let's take a quick look at a rough semantic segmentation. Open Napari's console 

> by pressing the ![](

Reviewer: I think elsewhere we've said use window -> console from the top menu. Should we be consistent? Or is it better to give different options?

Author: As far as I can see, we always use the console button at the bottom left of Napari. Do let me know if you find an inconsistency in another episode though!

Reviewer: Maybe I'm getting confused with something else (like opening files from the menu).

semantic_seg = blurred > threshold
viewer.add_labels(semantic_seg)
```

![](fig/semantic-seg-napari.png){alt="A screenshot of a rough semantic 
segmentation of nuclei in Napari"}

You should see an image appear that highlights the nuclei in brown. This is an 
example of a 'semantic segmentation'. In a semantic segmentation, pixels are 
grouped into different categories (also known as 'classes') - for example, 
nuclei vs background. Importantly, it doesn't recognise which pixels belong to 
different objects of the same category - for example, here we don't know which 
pixels belong to individual, separate nuclei. This is the role of 'instance 
segmentation' that we'll look at next.

Copy and paste the code below into Napari's console. Again, don't worry about 
the details of what's happening here - we'll look at some of these concepts in 
later episodes.

```python
from skimage.morphology import binary_erosion, ball
from skimage.segmentation import expand_labels
from skimage.measure import label

eroded = binary_erosion(semantic_seg, footprint=ball(10))
instance_seg = label(eroded)
instance_seg = expand_labels(instance_seg, distance=10)

viewer.add_labels(instance_seg)

> ```

Reviewer: Should each code snippet be stand alone? This will not work unless we have semantic_seg from the previous snippet. We could add 
`semantic_seg = viewer.layers["semantic_seg"].data`
Maybe it's not worth it as it won't work unless that layer is in the image anyway.

![](fig/instance-seg-napari.png){alt="A screenshot of a rough instance 
segmentation of nuclei in Napari"}

You should see an image appear that highlights nuclei in different colours. 
Let's hide the 'semantic_seg' layer by clicking the ![](
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/napari/napari/main/napari/resources/icons/visibility.svg
){alt="A screenshot of Napari's eye button" height='30px'} icon next to its name 
in Napari's layer list. 

This image is an example of an 'instance segmentation' - it is recognising which 
pixels belong to individual 'instances' of our category (nuclei). This is the 
kind of segmentation we will need in order to count the number of nuclei (and 

> therefore the number of cells) in our image.

Author: It's quite common for instance segmentation workflows to be in two steps: semantic segmentation, then splitting into individual instances. This isn't always the case though - for example, some methods find bounding boxes of individual objects first then segment them. I'll add a sentence to clarify this.

Also, I'll add a small section to the 'how are segmentations represented?' section about probabilistic segmentations

represent. Here, they no longer represent the intensity of light at each pixel, 
but rather the assignment of each pixel to different categories or objects e.g. 
0 = background, 1 = nuclei. You can also have many more values, depending on the 
categories/objects you are trying to represent. For example, we could have 
nucleus, cytoplasm, cell membrane and background, which would give four possible 
values of 0, 1, 2 and 3.

Let's take a look at the pixel values in the instance segmentation:

- Click the ![](
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/napari/napari/main/napari/resources/icons/visibility.svg
){alt="A screenshot of Napari's eye button" height='30px'} icon next to 
'instance_seg' in the layer list to make it visible. 
- Click the ![](
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/napari/napari/main/napari/resources/icons/visibility.svg
){alt="A screenshot of Napari's eye button" height='30px'} icon next to 
'semantic_seg' in the layer list to hide it.
- Make sure the 'instance_seg' layer is selected in the layer list. It should be 
highlighted in blue.

If you hover over the segmentation now, you should see that each nucleus has a 

> different pixel value. We can find the maximum value via the console like so:

Author: I'm pretty sure this is a dividing nucleus - so it's in metaphase, with the chromosomes appearing much thicker + condensed. So I'm not sure it's a false positive?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge 

## Segmentation shapes and data types

Copy and paste the following into Napari's console:

```python
nuclei = viewer.layers["nuclei"].data
semantic_seg = viewer.layers["semantic_seg"].data
instance_seg = viewer.layers["instance_seg"].data
```

- What shape are the `nuclei`, `semantic_seg` and `instance_seg` images?

- What pattern do you see in the shapes? Why?

- What bit-depth do the `semantic_seg` and `instance_seg` images have?

- If I want to make an instance segmentation of 100 nuclei - what's the 
minimum bit depth I could use? (assume we're storing unsigned integers) Choose 
from 8-bit, 16-bit or 32-bit.

- If I want to make an instance segmentation of 1000 nuclei - what's the 
minimum bit depth I could use? (assume we're storing unsigned integers) Choose 
from 8-bit, 16-bit or 32-bit.

Recall that we looked at image shapes and bit-depths in the ['What is an image?' 
episode](what-is-an-image.md).

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution 

### Solution

### Shapes + pattern

```python
print(nuclei.shape)
print(semantic_seg.shape)
print(instance_seg.shape)
```

```output
(60, 256, 256)
(60, 256, 256)
(60, 256, 256)
```

> All the images have the same shape of (60, 256, 256). This makes sense as 

Reviewer 2: Is there any scope here for highlighting just because they are the same image size, you might think that they could require the same hard disk storage, but in many cases these mask/segmentation images can be compressed heavily without loss of information.

'semantic_seg' and 'instance_seg' are segmentations made from the nuclei image. 
Therefore, they need to be exactly the same size as the nuclei image in order to 
assign a label to each pixel.

### Bit depths

```python
print(semantic_seg.dtype)
print(instance_seg.dtype)
```

```output
int8
int32
```

The data type (`.dtype`) of 'semantic_seg' contains the number 8, showing that 
it is an 8-bit image. The data type of 'instance_seg' contains the number 32, 
showing that it is a 32-bit image. Note that in this case, as the instance 
segmentation only contains 19 nuclei, it could also have been stored as 8-bit 

> (and probably should have been, as this would provide a smaller file size!).

Reviewer: This raises the question of why it wasn't stored as 8-bit and how you would go about converting it. Probably worth having an answer to hand for the lesson.

track of with the 'label:' option only.

### Contour

The contour setting controls how labels are displayed. By default (when 0), 
labelled pixels are displayed as solid colours. Increasing the contour value to 
one or higher, will change this to show the outline of labelled regions instead. 
Higher values will result in a thicker outline. This can be useful if you don't 
want to obscure the underlying image while viewing your segmentation.

### n edit dim

This controls the number of dimensions that are used for editing labels. By 
default, this is 2 so all painting and editing of the `Labels` layer will only 
occur in 2D. If you want to paint/edit in 3D you can increase this to 3. Now 
painting will not only affect the currently visible image slice, but slices 
above and below it also. Be careful with the size of your brush when using this 
option!

### preserve labels

Activating 'preserve labels' will ensure that any painting/erasing you do will 
only affect your currently active label. This is especially useful if you need 
to paint very close to existing labels without affecting them.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

> ## Manual vs automated?

Reviewer 2: I think we should flesh this out a bit more. Manual in some cases has been the training set from which automated methods are based. This is particularly the case in terms of  tricky situations when the boundaries are subtle and expert segmentations help guided automated ones.  However, manual segmentations are also more likely to have biases and increased variability and not be as repeatable as automated scan. And as you already point out, they can be slow and arduous (which again will lead to more bias and increased variability!) I think your points both about manual review and cleanup are important, but don't forget manual initialisation leading to semi-automated approaches (i.e. providing a starting seed/guess), which is also a good technique.

Now that we've done some manual segmentation in Napari, you can probably tell 
that this is a very slow and time consuming process (especially if you want to 
segment in full 3D!). Therefore, it's generally only suitable for small images 
in small quantities. If we want to efficiently scale to larger images in large 
quantities, then we need more automated methods. We'll look at some of these in 
the next few episodes. It's worth bearing in mind though that automated methods 
are rarely perfect, so it's very likely that you will have to do some manual 
segmentation cleanup from time to time.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: keypoints 

- The first step in any image processing workflow is quality control. For 
example, checking the histograms of your images.

- Segmentation is the process of identifying what each pixel in an image 
represents e.g. is that pixel part of a nucleus or not?

> - Segmentation can be broadly split into 'semantic segmentation' and 'instance 

Reviewer 2: I would add brief descriptions either in this keypoint or as separate additional keypoints about what these types of segmentations are!

segmentation'

- Segmentations are represented in the computer in the same way as standard 
images. The difference is that pixel values represent classes or instances, 
rather than light intensity.

> - Napari uses `Labels` layers for segmentations. These offer various annotation 

Reviewer 2: Another keypoint about manual vs automated?
